1. 	I started the value iteration agent by understanding how the Bellman optimality equation dynamically generates optimal values that can be used towards evaluating our policy, which in this case is a Markov decision process. In our case, the valueIterationAgent computes the optimal state-value function dynamically as the agent experiences the board more. I ensured to use a batch updating scheme while making sure that all values for iterations k+1 were computed using only the values from iteration k. This is critical to avoid the contamination of updates among iterations, which are not yet committed to the active state, and thus not yet fully experienced by the agent. 
      One challenge was ensuring that terminal states remained static. For example, in Gridworld, a terminal state has a value of 1, but after multiple iterations, its floating-point value slightly shifts, which significantly impacted how surrounding states perceived the best move, leading to incorrect and prolonged policy decisions. At first, I thought it was a floating-point precision error due to potential complexity of the floating-point size. However, fixing the issue required excluding terminal states from updates, short circuiting some path evaluations since a terminal state would have been reached. I ensured that the terminal states were still being used in iteratively updating the grid cells values and checked their values before and after each iteration to confirm they were truly static, or else fail. Lastly, I needed to decide a stopping condition(s), which I initially thought about running until the convergence of a tight threshold. But after implementing the architecture I saw a fixed number of iterations would experience the world plenty. Note: this is not an adaptive agent that “learns,” rather this updates a policy.
2. To start, understanding what the effects of each parameters’ value ranging from -1 to 1 have on the behavior of the gridworld agent were vital to parameter tuning these efficiently. A value of zero for any parameter negates the said parameter’s effects. For example, a noise of zero means the agent only makes optimal decisions. Then, a high discount value prefers long-term rewards (in our case, the +10 exit), while a low discount value prefers short-term rewards (in our case, the +1 exit). A high noise value forces the agent to move randomly sometimes (making cliffs risky), whereas a low noise value forces the agent to move more deterministically (but anything other than zero comes with a risk). A high living reward grants the agent a higher reward for staying alive longer (encouraging further exits, but too high can lead to avoiding exits entirely), while a low living reward causes the agent to want to end the game faster (encouraging closer exits).
a. This was the most challenging sub-question for me. Obviously setting the living reward to as low as possible (-1) would cause the agent to leave ASAP. However, it took a while to figure out that a discount value between 0.1-0.5 was necessary to count future goals’ rewards as a factor. So, a lower value of 0.1 made the most sense, though up to 0.5 worked as well.
b. I immediately understood more parameter tweaking than the other questions would be required here, since we need to balance going for the close goal but not the distant goal. I understood living reward should be low, if not zero, to encourage the closest reward. Also, I started with a small value for the discount of 0.1 while leaving the noise at zero, which didn’t work. This makes sense, since in such a small gridworld, only prioritizing the goal’s reward causes the agent to deterministically go towards the goal. However, adding a low value for noise caused the agent to succeed. This makes sense, since adding randomness causes the agent to learn to avoid the cliff, and thus with a low enough discount value, would prioritize the closest goal in this gridworld.
c. I knew to walk along the cliff reliably, we would need to get rid of the noise factor. Curiously, When I set discount to 0.5 for initial testing, it passed. Which makes sense since living a long time is harmful towards finding the quickest path to the goal, which is also along the cliff. Thus, noise and living reward are 0.
d. I understood a high discount value was necessary to prioritize the distant exit. Though, curiously the discount value of 1.0 didn’t work. Then, after tweaking only discount didn’t work, I gave a small value to noise, which caused it to pass. This makes sense, since a low noise value causes some randomness, and thus the agent learns over experiencing the gridworld that taking the cliff route is risky and not worthwhile, thus avoiding the cliff (which is part of the goal).
e. To avoid all exits and cliffs, I initially thought a high living reward would be all we need. However, setting all parameters to 0 and all parameters to 1 also seemed to work. Though, it makes more sense to only reward living if that’s the only goal, so I left only living reward with a value.
3. I understood that implementing a Q learning agent adds the ability of the agent to learn from trial and error rather than updating a grid’s value based on experience and prior actions. Unlike value iteration, where the transition model is known, Q learning operates without explicit knowledge of the state transition function, updating Q values through hard experience within sample transitions (in our case, running the game a bunch of times before the real game tests). Implementing the concepts into code was easier than I had originally thought, though the biggest challenge was ensuring I was updating the values correctly according to the Q-value iteration equation. I initially implemented the Q learning update function using the Q-value iteration equation, which I did incorrectly due to not properly initializing Q-values for state-action pairs that had not been encountered before. This was due to me initially not using the provided counter, which automatically initializes all unseen values to zero. Another challenge was implementing epsilon greedy exploration to dynamically lean towards exploitation to consistently choose the best-known actions. I initially didn’t know to simply use the static epsilon value given to us, not that we must figure out how to dynamically calculate it ourselves. It simply exists to allow for training (exploration, with epsilon chance to perform a random action) to testing (exploitation). Additionally, I thought we had to implement epsilon greedy exploration in a basic form within approximateQAgent, and in a tired tangent removed my approximateQAgent code to make it the same architecture as in QLearningAgent but to implement epsilon greedy, which is obvious incorrect. I had to reimplement approximateQAgent, which is why I had to submit my project late. 
4. For this problem, I had to reimplement the QLearningAgent using epsilon greedy exploration to work for exploration during training, and then exploitation for testing. I had to ensure that we use the given valid of epsilon as the greed value for how often to take a random legal move. This allows our agent to explore more thoroughly and make updates based on more recently learned data. I originally had implemented QLearningAgent class with epsilon greedy exploration since it was simple and made sense to add depth to our agent.
5. This problem simply required ensuring the code implemented within QLearningAgent worked for the pacman game. I did come across the issue mentioned about initializing unseen grids to 0.0 not properly considering unseen actions. In this case, initially the agent does not explore an unseen grid unless it’s surrounded by no other legal actions. However, after the first couple of tens to hundreds of training runs (overall negligible), the epsilon greedy exploration performs random exploration, re-initializing the value for all previously unexplored grids which have now been explored at least once. So, the only grid that would turn out non-visited for all. So, minimal work was required to ensure collect completion, but no additional implementation was required. 
6. For q6’s ApproximateQAgent class, I implemented function approximation using feature-based representations instead of a full Q-table representing grid legal actions. Thus, rather than storing explicit Q-values for legal moves in every (state,action) pair, we compute the dot product between a feature vector (input from (state,action) pair) and a learned weight vector. Then, we compute the loss based on the optimal action and update the weights accordingly. I understood that most of the QLearningAgent methods were already implemented within QLearningAgent. The primary modifications were required in getQValue and update. Improving QLearningAgent once again within ApproximateQAgent was straight forward and meaningful, no longer explicitly storing q-values and updating them, but rather learns how to generalize using feature extraction that capture important aspects of a (state,action) pair. A challenge came in implementing weight updates within the update function, especially when figuring out how to compute the loss. In our case, we had to compute the temporal difference error, which measures how far the current Q-value is from what it should be based on the learned reward function. This is the same concept as standard Q-learning, but now instead of updating a direct Q-value dictionary entry, we adjust the weights associated with each feature to learn generalized features from the game world to be used dynamically.

      The biggest problem faced was understanding how feature extractors work. I didn’t know what they actually extracted or how they interacted with the Q-learning update. It took a while of reading the project specifications and exploring featureExtractors.py to understand that they take in a (state, action) pair and return a scattered dictionary of feature-value pairs. This means that instead of manually designing what makes a certain (state, action) pair quality or not, the extractor defines key properties of the game environment and automatically provides these to be weighted. I initially believed that the agent needed to directly manipulate the feature values automatically determined by the extractor, but really, we learn the optimal weights to associate with each feature that is automatically determined by the extractor. So, instead of modifying Q-values directly, we modify how much influence each extracted feature has on our predictions. Once I understood the key concepts behind how the feature extraction works, implementing the feature extractor was as simple as getting the initial features and updating weights based on the features extracted from each (state, action) pair. 
7. For question 7, I took the lessons learned from project 1 in creating a neural network architecture based on the input shape (batch_size, state_dim) and the output shape (batch_size, action_dim). Our hidden layer needs to map between the input and output non-linearly using the ReLU non-linearity function. So, I simply referenced the simple two-layer neural network architecture from project 1, specifically within digit classification. At first, I thought we needed to extract features to make the neural network function as intended, but that was foolish since neural networks are meant to dynamically and automatically map their own features. So, to make the agent infer Q-values based on learned patterns, I made a simple feedforward neural network that consists of an input, hidden, and output layer, which thus has two weights, but also has two biases. We first apply linear gradient descent on the input value, then we apply linear transformation of x * W1 + b1 for the hidden layer. Then, we apply non-linearity through ReLU activation function to remove any learned traits that negatively affect the result. We then compute a second linear transformation to get the desired Q-values for all actions. The biggest challenge was ensuring the model properly learned from experience. Unlike within tabular Q-learning where we used dictionaries to store and pre-calculate Q-values based on (state, action) pairs, deep Q-learning relies on the neural network updating its weights based on observed transitions. If the model doesn’t properly perform machine learning, it could be due to strict parameter tuning requiring better parameter tuning, or due to incorrect neural network architecture that is correctly performing matrix operations to perform shape transformations from the input to the hidden to the output layers but isn’t mapping any features and thus isn’t learning.

      I came across the aforementioned issue of not understanding whether my neural network architecture was correct or not after spending over five hours parameter tuning my neural network. I also at one point completely scrapped by code to start again because I was receiving no indication of any machine learning whatsoever. Eventually, I realized that the smallest change of parameter values has large effects like not seen within project 1. Also, I eventually realized that the hidden size needed to be large enough to map the complex decisions that needed to be made. So, I increased the learning rate to thus perform more learning changes over more space to learn. Surprisingly to myself, increasing batch size greatly improved performance. So much so, that by simply doubling batch size from 32 to 64, my project completes the autograder with extra credit consistently, whereas before it was barely accomplishing a 60%-win rate. Honestly, I hadn’t anticipated getting full autograder credit from q7’s implementation due to how doomed I felt when training my architecture. My neural network architecture seemed correct, and I had checked it tens of times over, but for so many hours of debugging, I couldn’t find a parameter combination that produced rewards greater than -480 ever. Turns out the issue was that I needed a large enough hidden size as well as a learning rate fine tuned to the hidden size, as well as a large enough batch size to allow detailed observations to be made among runs. For example, a batch size of 10 allows for 10 different scenarios per training run, which doesn’t encapsulate all possible scenarios. So, when we train again on another set of 10 samples, we aren’t exponentially learning less and less since the weights are updated based on unique experiences, and not having enough unique experiences causes the neural network to overtrain for certain scenarios and undertrain for others. So, currently, the implementation has the current parameters are 0.45 for learning rate, training games set statically to 7000, hidden size set at 150, and batch size set at 64. It takes upwards of five minutes to train the model for my powerful modern computer. However, training games could be reduced as results begin to vary from improving to regressing after about 3000 test episodes.  
