Author: Zachary Reese
Professor: Dr. Schwesinger
Assignment: Project 1

1. 	After some minor installation issue with mismatching python version for both NumPy and matplotlib, I had major trouble understanding how to code the Perceptron according to the nn.py class file since I hadn’t seen one before. So, I took things slowly and laid out the details into what each method needs to accomplish and what objects they must be passed into each method. This helped me understand the task of each method was very simple and could be accomplished in one helper-function call. The perceptron needed to be classified into one of two classes (-1 or 1) based on its dot-product score. To accomplish this, I first got each method within the PerceptronModel class to return its intended result. Then, I iterated over the entire training dataset once and updated the weight after each iteration. At first, I updated the weight based on misclassifications but later updated it to use hinge-loss to move the weight in the direction of the input when scaled by its true label (1 or -1). This introduced issues of not updating upon a misclassification, preventing convergence. This was mitigated by ensuring that every dataset prediction is individually ensured to be correct before terminating training. However, despite hours of trying to remedy the issue, I could not prevent the program from erroring about every ½ of the runs, saying that weights were modified differently than expected, even if my model would predict correctly at the end. When the model succeeds, it varies heavily in the number of epochs from less than 10 to over 1500 epochs. This issue was not occurring before the last-minute change to hinge loss according to what was mandated as of 1/19, unless we lose points. I was not given enough time to implement and ask the professor questions, though I’m not sure if this issue can be fixed due to it likely being a floating point calculation issue. I ask that if I am to lose points on this question, that I be given a chance to submit a different version that doesn’t use hinge loss and would thus not give an error every ½ runs or so.

      Originally, the perceptron was running until it reached the max epoch for simplicity. However, this caused over-training of the model and mainly wasted training time. So, I modified the training code to stop when 100% accuracy is reached for the entire training dataset, as seen in the loop nested within the epoch loop. 

2. 	I began this challenge to design a neural network to approximate sin(x) by studying the project specifications and reviewing lecture slides. This problem of non-linear regression highlighted the need for a feed-forward architecture with at least one hidden layer and a relevant non-linearity function (given as ReLU). To solve for pi from -2pi to 2pi, I understood that the complexity of the problem would likely benefit from two layers rather than one. Especially when training with 200 examples at a time, enough complexity was required to map the variances between the different 200 examples. So, I chose a simple two-layer network where the first layer maps the 1-dimensional for each example (1x1 for each 200 makes 1x200). I experimented with various hidden sizes, learning rates, and batch sizes. Initially, I stopped training when the first epoch reached a loss below the threshold. However, this caused the neural network to stop converging early and under-train on some data while training more on others. I didn’t realize this simple mistake for a few hours, resulting in my neural network training towards being correct towards other values while training the value at hand. Getting my nn past the threshold with this bug was impossible, but I did get very close before realizing my mistake. I averaged an average loss of 0.035, getting as low as 0.022 at times. The parameters at this point revolved around a hidden size of 100, despite a hidden size of 50 previously giving the same results. 

         Upon updating my code to continue training until each batch passes the threshold, my nn immediately succeeded in training in under 1250 epochs. Then, I tried lowering the hidden size to see if there was too much mapping. Without having to modify any other parameters (notably learning rate), the nn was successfully completed training in under 800 epochs. Which makes sense, given that the pattern between how to predict the sin(x) value as close as possible to the actual sin(x) value is mapped between two floating point numbers. In a more complex scenario like mapping the prediction an image, there are infinitely many more complex patterns that can be mapped to classify the input, requiring a learning rate that varies according to the complexity of the mapping (hidden size).

3. I began the classifying handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset challenge by adapting the architecture from the non-linear regression task. This mainly involved reshaping the weight and biases (which when combined make up the two layers), as well as adding a classifying loss function (SoftMax). The input for image classification is a flattened 784-dimensional vector representing the 28x28 pixel grayscale image of a handwritten number. The possible classifications (numbers 0-9) is represented by a one-hot encoded vector, where the value containing 1 is the predicted/correct classification. The output needs to be a 10-dimensional logits vector that represents the predicted value. SoftMax will classify the logits into their respective digits. For this problem though, SoftMax will only produce one value (1) for the predicted digit, not a distribution representing the predicted possibilities of certain digits. For this task, ReLU is still a relevant non-linearity function since it removes any mis-trained neurons that mis-classify the input during training predictions.

      My original goal was to complete training in under 10 epochs. However, by the end of development, my neural network only required 6 epochs. I stopped training my neural network once the average accuracy within an epoch is over the 97% threshold. At the start of testing, I had a hidden layer size of 100, which understandably benefitted from a lower learning rate due to less mapping being done within a hidden layer size of 100. I saw consistently better results with a higher learning rate (approaching around 0.1) with a hidden layer size of 150. Though, by the end of development, I had parameters working to accomplish 97% accuracy with both a hidden size of 150 at a learning rate of 0.075, as well as with a hidden size of 100 at a learning rate of 0.05.  Most surprising (at first glance) was the result of changing the batch size. The larger the batch size, the less the neural network learned from each iteration of the dataset. I believe this is because each digit to be recognized through OCR can have infinitely many possible patterns that the neurons of the network can naturally find, so having the same hidden space to map the patterns of less values makes sense to produce higher accuracy and better training results, since the same resources are being dedicated to less computation at a time, resulting in greater focus when training against a single digit. With batch sizes of 40 or greater, I saw a significant decrease in operational efficiency and had a bigger struggle getting above the 97% accuracy threshold. Increasing the learning rate along with the batch sizes helped significantly, but didn’t make as exponential as an impact as decreasing the batch size.
	
4. The language classification problem presented substantial challenges in the architecture development process. The project specifications highlighted that the input would be a one-hot vector of size 47 provided in batches, the start of each word had to be processed using a simple feed-forward architecture, that the problem needed to be solved recursively, and that the output needed to be encoded to one of the available languages. The main issue was envisioning an architecture that correctly handles the shape transformations among layers, especially to get from the recurrent layer to the dynamic number of available languages, as well as whether this problem would require a three-layered neural network. I was under the assumption that the hidden layer required a bias to perform accurately. However, after our class on 2/19 going over examples of shape transformations within neural network layers, I understood that not only could a weight be shared, but when training on the same type of data, especially towards a very similar (or in this case, the same) training goal, sharing weights is highly beneficial. However, when it comes to biases, these are more specific to a certain stage in the weighting process and introduce inaccuracies (complexity) when used dynamically, like in a recursive scenario, even if used on the same type of training data for the same training goal. I reread the project description many times and eventually realized my mistake of assuming that the hidden layer required a bias for sufficient transformation, when in fact none of the layers for any of the problems actually required a bias. So, I removed the bias from the recursive layer for simplicity while trying to discover a network architecture that works. While I was still having trouble getting shape transformations to match up, I decided to simplify the problem by writing out the respective shapes of the anticipated input and output. While doing this, I discovered that not only does the very first character need transformation for recurrent processing, but so does the other characters. I originally was trying to develop an architecture with an extra weight to transform the recurrently processed letters into the same shape as the very first character but saw that not only does the input layer have the same size, but it’s already being trained on character data related to the word’s language classification. So, simply adapting the input layer as part of the recurrent (hidden) layer was not only sufficient, but practically helpful. Then, for the recurrent weight, I simply used a square shape to ensure that the size doesn’t change during the layer processing. Next, I added the processed recurrent transformation with the previous transformation, essentially accumulating the prediction results from subsequent characters for a final language classification. Lastly, after all characters have been processed, I transformed the final accumulated training prediction with the output weight to create the output shape of 1 x num_languages. 

	I then computed average loss after transformation of an entire iteration of the dataset to ensure accuracy of at least 82%, which is one more than the goal of 81% to be safe. At times, the model overtrains on the training data and performs poorly on the testing data. To mitigate this, I forced the model to train for at least 5 epochs, which is enough to ensure an 81% accuracy by epoch 5 while also ensuring no overtraining on training data. To start, I set the parameters according to my intuition: a high learning rate (0.1+), a mediocre batch size (100 for such a large dataset), and a hidden size of 100, which served as a starting point that seemed sufficient for learning characters among different languages. I had assumed that language classification would be a less resource intensive problem than digit classification, but in the end, I was proven wrong. 

   Upon training, I quickly discovered that like in digit classification, smaller batch sizes allowed for more careful training updates, leading to greater accuracy after each epoch. Also, higher hidden sizes led to quick over-training. A batch size of 25 trained to 82% accuracy on training data with a learning_rate of 0.1 and a hidden_size of 100 after 4 epochs. With a batch size of 20 however, it trained to 88% accuracy after only 3 epochs. Learning rate remained high among all the training examples, which makes sense since this is a complex problem which doesn’t have a known pattern to become a fit size fits all solution. This is also visible in the training accuracy being well below 90%, showing that the neural network is not finding an accurate solution to the problem. Increasing hidden size from 100 to 150 showed significant improvement to an accuracy of 89% after only 3 epochs, as well as a much higher accuracy on the testing data than all other previous iterations, and a double in processing time to close to one minute. This also makes sense, since a greater area to train on leaves more room for additional learning patterns. However, increasing the hidden size from 150 to 200 showed no improvements, but does lead to a greater risk of overtraining, as is made clear by previous examples going well past convergence to overtraining when given too much to train with.  

   Upon removing the training stopping condition at hidden size 100, my model gets up to 89% after only 5 epochs without parameter adjustments. After which, it quickly overtrains and loses accuracy. At hidden size 150, my model gets up to 88% after 6 epochs and 92% after 13 epochs. Around the 7th epoch though, the model over trains and begins to have its accuracy go down. At which point, ReLU function is removing more harmful neurons to make room for new training opportunities, allowing for reconvergence by the 13th epoch at a higher accuracy than before, at which point overtraining begins to occur again.
