1. I started the implementation of constructing a Bayes Net structure for two hunting two ghosts by simply declaring the variables and their edges for populating the Bayes Net constructor call. Then, I created a dictionary indexed by the variables mapping to Pacman’s inference of the ghostbuster’s world. This dictionary holds all the possible assignments of ghost locations (x,y pairs) for both ghosts and Pacman. However, the domain dictionary also contains observation distances from zero to the maximum noise value of seven. Finally, we construct the empty Bayes Net similar to the printStarterBayesNet class in bayesNet.py.
2. The goal is to join two probability tables (factors) by multiplying their corresponding entries. A factor contains probabilities for all possible assignments of its variables, where each row corresponds to a unique assignment to the variables. Two variables within a factor here would be, for example, rain and game, with the joined probabilities representing traffic probability. However, there can be more factors. For example, we could combine f(x, y) and f(y, z), where we must multiply probabilities from both tables for each assignment that shares the same value of y, forming a new factor that contains P(x,y,z). The join of two factors with various numbers of variables is using the product rule to find the joint probability of all variables and their unique assignments.
3. The goal is to remove an unconditional variable from a computed probability table (Factor) by calculating: all its probability values for each assignment are summed with the probability values of the rest of the variables for said assignment. Rather than literally eliminating the elimination variable (subtracting), we are simply “averaging” (not actually averaging) the elimination variable’s existing influence onto the remaining probability table when we do matrix multiplication. This captures the full effect of the elimination variable and collapses it into the probabilities of the remaining variables.
4. For inferencing by variable elimination, the goal was to answer queries of the form P(query | evidence). The example inference by enumeration joins all factors and then eliminates all hidden variables in one go, which is inefficient since the joined factor is computing more than required. A more efficient way is to alternate the joining and elimination steps for each hidden variable. Each hidden variable must be segmented from the factors set. Then, for each hidden variable, I joined all factors that mentioned that variable and then marginalized it by summing over its domain. Lastly, I joined and normalized all remaining factors to produce probabilities based on the queried variables and evidence.
5. 
a. Here, the task was to simply implement the normalization of a dictionary of values. Then, to implement sampling a key from the dictionary based on the key’s value. For sampling, it was important to ensure compatibility with dictionaries that are not normalized.
b. Here, the task was to compute P(noise | pacman_pos, ghost_pos), which seems complex, but it is mostly handled for me by “busters.getObservationProbability.” I simply needed to handle the special cases where there is no noisy distance, and where the ghost’s position is the jail cell due to having been captured and placed in jail.
6. Updating the belief distribution requires adding new piece(s) of evidence onto the previously observed state, with each piece of evidence being the perceived ghost distance. This follows Bayes’ rule, which states that the: (probability of a hypothesis given the state evidence) = (likelihood x prior) / normalization. Following this, the equation for updating based on ghostbusters state information would be” b’(p) = b(p) * P(observation | pacmanPosition, p, jailPosition)/ normalization,” where “p” is a ghost position, and “b” is the current belief distribution. Calling the given function getObservationProb considers the jail positions, Pacman’s position, and the observation to determine the probability that the ghost is on a grid position, for every position, including the jail positions.
7. The last question required updating the belief distribution based on a new piece of noisy evidence from Pacman’s sensors. So, we took what we used to believe about each ghost’s position and updated its distribution with the probability of the ghost being located at each position given the evidence. Thus, a Bayesian update. However, for question 7, we must predict where each ghost may be in the future based on the belief distribution from the previous game state and the ghost’s movement probability distribution (based on a position), called the transition distribution (provided to us given game state and position). So, instead of multiplying by the likelihood of an observation, we “sum out” (matrix multiply) the previous positions by using the transition model to accumulate weighted (non-normalized) data on where the ghosts may be (a probability distribution). This allows each old position to contribute (via its transition distribution) to several possible new positions, for each legal position. The result is a distribution of the game grid representing the probabilities of a ghost being in each grid one step in the future.
8. This question involves incorporating the elapseTime and observeUpdate functions made in questions 6 and 7 for updating Pacman’s belief distribution for a single ghost based on exact inference (keeping a probability distribution value for each grid, and thus an “exact” value, for each ghost). Within the chooseAction function for the GreedyBustersAgent, we are provided with the living ghost position distributions already updated for the game state. To select the best decision while incorporating all living ghosts, we must find the most likely position for each ghost, simply by calling argmax on the position distribution, then select which one of those best actions has the shortest maze distance from Pacman. This function could be more efficient/less greedy by simply caching distance and getSuccessor calls as needed, but the project’s scope simply aims for a greedy solution, which runs fast enough.
9. The second hardest part of question 9 was ensuring the uniform distribution of each legal position when initializing a new particle, among an unknown number of particles represented by self.numParticles. At first, I was simply using mod incorrectly before I reminded myself that after dividing, the remainder is the number returned, and we can use this to distribute, say 65, among say, 14 particles evenly. Next, we must convert a list of particles into a belief distribution. The hardest part of this problem was figuring out how to convert the particle list into a probability distribution, especially since we were not provided with any relevant helper functions for this method. However, the lack of context was a hint in itself, and eventually I remembered the strength of using a particle list; each particle is not weighted until each unique particle is summed. So, I simply accumulated all unique particles within the particle list and stored them within the modified dictionary structure made for storing a probability distribution, called DiscreteDistribution, where each key is the unique particle (position).
10. To update the list of particles based on an observation from Pacman on the game state, we must map the probability of each existing particle compared to the observation and game state within a probability distribution. Then, we use the probability distribution, which represents the probability of each position accurately predicting where the ghost is, to sample new particle positions based on which positions are most likely. The resulting particles list attempts to eliminate the noisy reading by leaving all likely possible positions within the particle list each turn. And after many turns, noisy readings from previous steps are left out and replaced by relevant predictions narrowing down the ghost locations, thanks to the reliable sensor model getObservationProb given to us. Then, if all particle weights are zero, the particle list must be reinitialized to avoid failure. The weights can all be zero when the list of probable ghost position narrows down to the final probable positions, but those positions are unlikely given a new observation, meaning the ghost is not close to the few narrowed down positions available to the particle list. Reinitializing the particle list allows it to use the game states going forward to re-narrow down the ghost position.
11.  ExactInference’s elapseTime function required computing a new belief for every grid location by summing over all possible previous positions (all legal grids) multiplied by the grid’s transition probability for a new ghost, with the summed probability distribution representing the probability of a ghost in each grid based on the previous belief. This allowed us to update our beliefs after each time update, as well as after each observation, providing a calculated exaction/inference on the ghost’s location. However, in particle filtering, we are not storing beliefs explicitly. Instead, we store a list of particles whose frequency approximates the belief distribution. However, we can still call the getPositionDistribution function like for ExactInference’s elapseTime function since we have the oldPos, represented by each existing particle, (and the game state) to pass. The resulting transition distribution can then be calculated for each particle and be used to sample the next position to replace each particle. However, the resulting update calculations can become inefficient and greedy. As particles narrow down a ghost’s position, and many particles are only storing a few unique positions, we could be calculating the same transition distribution many times, given the same positions. So, I created a caching dictionary that gets deleted every time elapseTime is finished processing, allowing for more efficient/less greedy processing. This improved processing speed (with graphics) from 108 seconds to 88 seconds. So, I decided to implement persistent caching by declaring the caching library in the ParticleFilter class’s init function, but the processing time ended up taking longer than before. So, the final implementation currently implements basic caching that clears after every call to elapseTime within a dictionary called transitionCache.
